Ever since China's switched to being a
net importer of oil, there have been
real concerns about the vulnerability of
its oil imports and specifically its
seaborne oil imports
by various modern navies, notably that
of the United States. Yeah, that's why
we saw China,
you know,
build these pipelines to deliver the
deliver oil overland from Russia and
from Kazakhstan. And so, given those
concerns, uh given, you know, those
fears that, you know, in the event of a
conflict that pits China, you know, and
the United States, um you know, against
each other, um would China, you know,
would the United States be able to cut
off the flow of oil to China?
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> So, Tracy, we are recording this 1:00
p.m. March [music] 4th, 2026 and
>> of those days where you have to nail the
hour and the minute cuz who knows what's
going to happen.
>> Absolutely. Of course, we are in the
midst of a war with Iran. And it's been
an extraordinary week in markets,
massive surge in the price of oil, all
kinds of concerns about the sheer
logistics of getting oil other as well
as other commodities out of that region.
Who's going to be affected? Um
The ramifications are just global for
obvious reasons.
>> Yeah, there's clearly a lot to talk
about, but there are some interesting
angles in particular that you and I have
been discussing and we're going to try
to hit all of those, um sort of
individually in a lot of different
episodes that are coming up. But for
this particular episode, we want to talk
about something that, you know,
obviously the US, Europe have kind of
been I would say the main [snorts]
subject of a lot of the the
hand-wringing at or the focus at the
moment. So Europe we know has had to
grapple with higher energy costs for a
while and clearly, you know, all this
chaos in the Middle East is not going to
be good for that. But one thing that
hasn't gotten as much attention is what
this actually means for China which is a
huge huge purchaser of oil from the
Middle East.
>> Right. It's a really important. So
obviously in the US we're sort of
swimming with oil. We're an oil
exporter. This could
This could be very good also for our gas
exports to Europe. I mean already we've
seen this big increase in gas exports
from the US to Europe particularly just
in the wake of the ongoing war in
Ukraine. So this could be further create
further opportunities. But for all the
countries that are, you know, major
importers and China being one is
obviously of a
very different dimension for them.
>> Absolutely. Also, can I just say that
this particular topic is finally finally
an opportunity to touch on teapot
refiners in China which I always never
got to it. But But now's our chance.
>> I will learn what a tea I I've known at
times what a teapot refinery is.
>> Wait, what's your impression if if
someone says teapot refinery, what do
you think?
>> Uh don't put me on the spot like that. I
just imagine a little refinery. Yeah, I
mean that's it basically. All right.
That was a good guess.
>> A teapot. Yeah, I guess it's kind of
>> I just think it has a cute name and so I
like thinking about it.
>> Anyway, I'm very excited to say we
really do have the perfect guest today
to sort of talk about the energy
dimension from some angles that have
that deserve and need more exploration
in this precise moment. We're going to
be speaking with Erica Downs. She's a
senior research scholar at Columbia
University Center on Global Energy
Policy and
and an expert truly in this field. So
Erica, thank you so much for coming on
Odd Lots.
>> Thank you so much for having me.
>> Well, then uh just for the sake of our
audience, would you give us the sort of
brief overview of your work? Tell us a
little bit about what you do in your
general field of study.
>> So, my research focuses primarily on the
geopolitics of energy. And so, I've been
kept busy recently looking at China's
energy relationships with Russia, with
Venezuela, and of course this week with
Iran.
>> So, why don't you sum up, I guess,
China's relationship with energy at the
moment then? The only thing I know in in
recent times that sort of hit the
headlines is that China's been importing
an enormous amount of oil, which both
suggests that it needs oil and it's an
important thing for its economy to work,
but also that, you know, maybe in the
face of tighter supply coming from the
Middle East, it has something of a
cushion.
>> So, yes, China has been putting a lot of
oil into storage. They kick-started
their strategic petroleum reserve over
20 years ago and have been building it
up precisely to have a moment like the
one that we are in now.
Now, China, as you mentioned, is a big
importer of oil.
About half the oil that they import come
About half the oil that China imports
comes from the Middle East. Most of
those Middle East oil supplies pass
through the Strait of Hormuz, which is
now closed.
>> Talk to us a little bit about the
volumes here that we're talking about.
Tracy mentioned that obviously they're
importing
quite a bit and much of it keeping in
storage. Like, okay, we're talking about
Iran or something, how crucial is that
relationship? What do we know about its
volume? What do we know about pricing?
Tell us some more details about this
particular bilateral trading
relationship.
>> Sure. So, last year China imported 11.6
million barrels per day. About 1.4
million barrels per day came from Iran.
So, that accounted for about 12% of
China's crude oil imports.
The main buyers of Iranian oil in China
are the teapot refineries. I've been
following the teapot refineries for a
long time, and I love to talk about
them. So, Joe is very happy to hear you
speak about them in your introduction.
Yeah, and so the teapots are small
independent refineries. Uh
many of them are clustered in Shandong
province. Um they're not as big or
sophisticated as the refineries operated
by China's national oil companies or the
new integrated refining and
petrochemical
uh projects. These are world-scale
projects uh that have uh popped up in
China over the past few years. Uh so,
the teapots are much smaller, less
sophisticated, and they rely on the
discounts they can receive on sanctioned
crudes uh to boost their bottom lines.
And in some cases, they probably depend
on these crudes for their survival. So,
they're the main buyers of Iranian crude
in China. Uh the national oil companies
that were, you know, lifting, you know,
all of Iranian's crude to take back to
China um you know, 10, 15 years ago are
completely out of the Iran oil trading
business uh because of concerns about US
sanctions.
And I was going to say, and just to to
bring this back to the teapots, you
know, the reason why they are buying and
the national oil companies, China's
national oil companies aren't is because
the teapots are more risk tolerant. And
what I mean by that is that the national
oil companies have a vested interest in
maintaining access to the US dollar
financial system. You know, these are
global companies with the
operations. They don't want to lose that
access. Whereas, if you look at the
Teapots who are still buying Iranian
crude today, I suspect that they have
little or no, you know, interest in
maintaining access to the US dollar
financial system. Sure, they'd prefer
not to be sanctioned, but it sanctions
being sanctioned wouldn't be
catastrophic for them in the way it
might be for Sinopec or China National
Petroleum Corporation. And so, it's this
risk tolerance, as well as this pursuit
of discounted barrels that has made the
Teapots the biggest importers of Iranian
crude in China.
>> So, I don't mean to go on too big of a
Teapot tangent. How's that for
alliteration, Joe? Thank you.
But, how did we end up with this
situation where we have these national
refining giants in China, which I
assume, you know, enjoy support from the
state, and they enjoy all the benefits
of scale, and then you have these tiny
or smaller refiners, independent
refiners that have sort of cropped up.
Like, how did that system actually
begin?
>> Yeah, so sure, happy to provide some
background. So, the Teapot refineries,
which are actually called local
refineries in China,
sort of originated, they grew up in
China, in northeastern China to process
crude from the Shengli oil field, you
know, which historically was one of
China's backbone oil fields.
And for most of their existence, you
know, these Teapots, you know, did not
have the right to import
and process imported crude. And this all
changed back in 2015 when the Chinese
government, you know, said that any, you
know, that Teapots who met certain
requirements would be granted
licenses to purchase and process
imported crude. And the criteria that
the teapots had to meet, you know, was
were things such as, you know, sort of
getting rid of highly
uh polluting crude distillation units,
um
building natural gas storage, um believe
it or not. Um and so, you know, teapots
that met these requirements could, you
know, apply for licenses, and they get a
license, and they'd be given a quota, uh
and they could use that quota to
purchase um crude from outside of
China's borders. And when I first
started looking at the teapots, you
know, around the time that they uh got
the permission to
import crude, uh they had a pretty
diverse uh
slate of suppliers. But, as
sanctions on, you know, countries um
such as Iran, Russia, you know,
Venezuela tightened, and discounts uh
were on offer to entice buyers to take
these barrels that a lot of other uh
importers were consuming, you know, the
teapots stepped into the void.
>> How big are these discounts? So,
intuitively, okay, a country gets
sanctioned, and then a bunch of buyers,
and that makes a lot of sense, don't
want to deal with it or don't want to
risk getting sanctioned themselves. So,
when Iran, by dint of sanctions, is
essentially forced to sell a significant
amount of their oil to these teapots, do
we have a sense of like what the pricing
is on these deals relative to overall
oil prices?
>> The discounts that China's teapot
refineries uh receive on sanctioned
barrels are certainly attractive enough
uh to make them seek them out. Now,
these discounts
uh change over time, you know, they're
often reported in industry press as, you
know, a certain number of dollars, you
know, cheaper than the price of Brent
crude. And just to give you a sense of
how important these are to the teapots,
Reuters ran a piece I believe back in
2023 where they said they had calculated
that China had saved $10 billion
on crude oil imports by importing these
sanctioned crudes.
>> Okay, so you you can imagine that in the
current scenario where you have these
teapot refineries that are, you know,
benefiting from the discount between
sanctioned and non-sanctioned oil,
they're going to be hit by
I guess less oil in the system in
general. But, I mean
Russia still exists. Russian oil is
still out there. Could you see a
scenario where they just start importing
more Russian oil to offset some of the
supply that's lost in the Middle East?
>> Yeah, I do think that is likely. And I
will say this is actually a tough time
for the teapots because last month
the Trump's removal of Venezuelan
President Maduro from office and the US
taking control of the marketing of some
of Venezuela's crude sort of raised
questions about how much oil how much
Venezuelan oil would China still be able
to import and at what price and sort of
in anticipation
of potential shortfall in their
Venezuelan oil imports, the teapots
turned to Iran and specifically to
purchasing Iran Iranian heavy crude
which was is, you know, a decent
substitute and, you know, certainly
could be obtained at a discount. But,
now of course, you know, with the war in
the Middle East, you know, this is sort
of raising questions about the teapot
supply of Iranian oil. The good news I
guess for China as a whole is that they
are sitting on substantial
strategic and commercial oil stockpiles,
you know, that should
you know, that
provide
120 days of China's net crude oil
imports at the 2025 level. So, you know,
what that means is that if all of, you
know, if China was unable to import any
oil at all, which obviously isn't going
to happen, they could, you know, rely on
their stockpiles for
4 months of crude oil imports. And so,
if you look at the sort of Iranian crude
and, you know, perhaps other flows that
might be disrupted by the closure of the
Strait of Hormuz, you know, they're
sitting in a pretty good position. Um
also, there is, you know, a good amount
of Iranian and Russian crude in floating
storage in Asia, off the coast of China
and Malaysia. And, you know, this had
been sort of building up before the US
and Israel launched their strikes on
Iran. And there is also Iranian oil
sitting in bonded storage in Chinese
ports, which could be tapped into.
>> You know, you mentioned the significance
of the, you know, we're talking about
the
Iran-China trading relationship. How
significant was Venezuela in this
picture? And what do we know about the
picture now? Cuz I think we're I think
there's still Venezuelan oil now going
to China right now, but how talk to us
about the
the significance of the of that piece of
the puzzle.
>> Yeah, so
Venezuela is a smaller crude oil
supplier to China than Iran. Last year,
Venezuela, you know, supplied, you know,
around 400,000 barrels per day of crude
oil to China. So, you're just looking
at, you know, a few very, very small
share, you know, 3-4% of China's
total crude oil imports last year.
However, you know, virtually all of that
oil was going to the teapot refineries.
So, while you can say, "Oh, China's not
going to be hit too hard if, you know,
it loses 400,000 barrels per day of
crude oil imports from Venezuela. Uh it
does sort of make life more difficult
for the teapot refineries.
Now, Secretary Wright did say a couple
weeks ago that, you know, the US had
sold some Venezuelan crude to China. Um
I don't know who the buyers are, and of
course for the teapots, um you know,
price is also an issue. I mean, yes,
they would like to, you know, continue
to import those Venezuelan barrels
because they're used to processing, you
know, that type of crude. Uh but it the
current situation um means that they
might be, even if they can still, you
know, buy a fair amount of Venezuelan
oil, you know, that's being marketed by
the US, you know, I think a big question
for them is at what price.
>> Can we go back to China's strategic
petroleum reserve for a second because I
feel like the US reserve was such a big
talking point during the Biden
administration, and it kind of, you
know, soared into our collective
consciousness. When we think about
China's SPR, what are the actual goals
there of the Chinese state? Why did they
establish this? What are they thinking
about? And then also, what do we
actually know about it?
>> Yeah, so the main reason China
established its strategic oil reserve is
because China is a major importer of
oil. Uh China switched to a net importer
of oil in 1993.
Uh and as its reliance on imported crude
grew, there were real concerns about
supply security in China. And so,
building a strategic petroleum reserve,
um you know, is one of the things that
they did, um you know, to make sure that
they were in a good position, uh you
know, to deal with uh unexpected
disruptions to their oil supplies. Uh
now one thing as I mentioned earlier,
I've been looking at this issue for for
quite some time and I recall, you know,
going back, you know, over 20 years ago,
you know, there there were
discussions in China about, do we need
this? Can we afford it? You know, how
big a stockpile, you know, do we want to
invest in building? And, you know, as
you may know, for states that are
members of the International Energy
Agency, at which China is not, but the
International Energy Agency, you know,
requires uh members to hold, you know,
stockpiles um you know, equal to, you
know, 90 days of net oil import
coverage, you know, and so that's the
benchmark that has been used in a lot of
Chinese discussions about its SPR over
the years. And, you know, again, I
remember, you know, going back 15-20
years ago, and you did have voices in
China that were saying, you know, we
already import a lot of oil. Our imports
are going to continue to grow. You know,
can we really afford to build 90 days of
net oil import coverage? You know, but
if you fast forward to today and you
look at the different estimates out
there about how much oil is sitting in
storage in China, you know, to include
both strategic stockpiles as well as
commercial stockpiles, you know, held by
oil companies, you know, China holds
more than 90 days of net oil import
coverage. And so, looking at the
disruptions, you know, to China's
Looking looking at the geopolitical sort
of upheavals in um you know, crude oil
markets, you know, just this calendar
year, uh with the US actions in
Venezuela and now Iran, yeah, the fact
that China does is sitting on these uh
substantial stockpiles, you know, has to
be a source of peace of mind and sort of
a vindication for uh undertaking this
project.
>> Yeah.
>> Tracy mentioned, obviously, all the
fights about the SPR in the US under the
Biden administration. And it's kind of
weird because
like, you know, there's some question,
why does you know, the US is a massive
exporter producer of oil now in a way
that wasn't the case 20 years ago or 30
years ago. Or at the time, certainly at
the time that the SPR was first
conceived. So I'm it's a little unclear
what the point of an SPR is and so I'm
not surprised that it's sort of used to
lower the price of gasoline for
consumers in a time of high inflation
and so forth.
In China where you know, the automobile,
you know, they're switching rapidly to
EVs, oil is not going to be as important
for that and it's going to continue to
be less important over time. How much is
it about prosecuting a war at some point
and the prospect that they would
completely get shut off from oil imports
in the event of
uh
in the event of aggression. And how much
is that really what it's about, being
having the resources to fight a war if
and if and when that time comes.
>> Yeah, no, I absolutely think that is
part of it. Um ever since China switched
to being a net importer of oil, there
have been real concerns about the
vulnerability of its oil imports and
specifically its seaborne oil imports uh
by various modern navies, uh notably
that of the United States. Yeah, that's
why we saw China uh you know,
build these pipelines to deliver to
deliver oil overland from Russia and
from Kazakhstan. And so given those
concerns, uh given you know, those fears
that you know, in the event of a
conflict that pits China, you know, and
the United States um you know, against
each other, um would China, you know,
would the United States be able to cut
off the flow of oil to China? And just
to put this you know, sort of even in
sort of broader historical context, you
know, if we go back to, you know, the
1960s, the time that the
the relationship between China and the
Soviet Union was following was falling
apart.
At that point, China was
heavily reliant on the Soviet Union for
refined products needed to fuel its
military,
like jet fuel. And so, as those tensions
between China and the Soviet Union
increased, the USSR did cut back on
refined oil product exports to China.
China has first-hand experience of being
in, you know, a tense relationship with
another major power and having that
major power,
>> Yeah.
>> uh you know, squeezed the country with
respect to imported oil products.
>> Actually, this might be a good time to
ask just about China's foreign policy
more broadly. So, I I saw, you know,
they issued a statement following the
attacks. And I I read one person
describe it as the kind of thing you
would expect from Brussels, you know,
very
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> very generic, expressing concern over
the situation in Iran. But, they also
expressed concern over the attacks on
the UAE, for instance, which, you know,
is is of economic importance to China,
certainly.
What's your sense of I guess what is at
stake beyond just oil for China in this
particular situation?
>> You know, sort of looking beyond China's
energy imports from the region, China's
national oil companies are big producers
in Iraq, so they have a number of
upstream assets in that country. Uh
Chinese firms are also involved in
building other types of infrastructure
in the region. For example,
there are Chinese companies that are
building
operating
renewable energy facilities, especially
solar farms in the region. And because
of this, we've seen
you know, Beijing called not just you
know, for
everyone to help ensure the free flow of
energy from the region, but also to make
sure that civilians aren't hit, right?
Because you have Chinese citizens on the
ground there. Doesn't want them to get
hit.
You know, it doesn't want any of its
sort of physical economic assets
infrastructure in the region
to you know, to to get hit.
>> Joe, I just remembered in Dubai, kind of
outside of like main Dubai, there was
this mall and it was called I think it
was called Dragon Mart and it was just a
Chinese market.
>> I've read about it. In Dubai, you would
love it. Absolutely. Like everything
imaginable was available there and like
when you went there, it felt very very
surreal actually.
>> Oh, yeah, I would love it. That might I
that sounds like the most interesting
thing I've heard of in Dubai. Nothing
else I've never nothing else about Dubai
has ever
made me
>> tell you more interesting things.
There's the North Korean restaurants and
things like that.
>> want I want to check out North Korean
restaurant.
>> Yeah,
maybe you do and maybe you don't.
>> I've been to one in Beijing.
>> Oh, really?
>> Many years ago.
>> Yeah, I've read about them. I've read
about like the chain of North Korean I'm
very I mean, it's just Korean food,
right?
>> I mean, well, it's slightly
has its own twist. It's good food
not so great surveillance. That's how
I'll
or actually maybe the surveillance is a
little too good. Yeah, there we go.
>> Good food, excellent That's like That's
a great like a great Yelp review. The
surveillance was great.
>> [laughter]
>> The food
>> Good food, excellent surveillance.
>> Excellent
surveillance.
>> Come for the food, stay for the
>> for the face recognition. Um, you know,
I get the impression with
just to stick on Chinese foreign policy
for a second, one thing I hadn't
realized up until recently, and it it
just hadn't dawned on me, is like China
doesn't have any like formal like treaty
allies. You know, there's like nobody,
unlike the US, like we have an
agreement, we um
could then, you know, obligated or we
agreed to defend them. I don't think
China does it that way. Talk a little
bit more, like I was surprised, you
know, at the kind of Tracy mentioned it,
the sort of neutralish tone. It's like
telling Iran, like be careful in your
retaliation and who you hit for obvious
some of the reasons that you mentioned.
Um, you know, but it's certainly not
like we're seeing China make any
statement like we're going to or we're
going to up our shipments of weapons or
defense weapons to Iran. Maybe they're
doing some of that covertly, but they
don't make a big announcement of it. But
it strikes me like that's very telling
that even a country with whom they have
a fairly substantial economic
partnership with and maybe some sort of
ideological alignment in terms of
countering um
Western hegemony and so forth, you know,
still even with them, they don't there's
nothing formal formally established.
Talk a little bit more about how they
think strategically about the region
beyond just the sort of um commercial
commercial needs.
>> Sure. So, China wants to maintain good
relations with Iran, and it also wants
to maintain good relations with Saudi
Arabia, the UAE, Oman, other states in
the region. And so, China historically
has, you know, sort of walked this
tightrope you know, in trying to
you know, balance relationships,
you know, with the Saudis, with the
Iranians, and
you know, I think they have been pretty
successful in pulling that off. Now,
China has no interest in getting bogged
down in a military conflict in the
region. So, we're not going to see China
get involved in that.
They are happy to be a mediator and in
fact uh
Beijing, you know, recently announced, I
think just a few hours ago that they
are sending their special envoy to the
region for mediation purposes. Uh and
so, I think that China likes playing
that role. I think it certainly, you
know, sort of bolsters their image as a
sort of responsible
outside power uh that is, you know,
getting involved in the region, you
know, with the goal of restoring peace
and stability.
>> So, one thing I wanted to make sure to
ask you is just more broadly, you've
spent your entire academic career
studying Chinese energy markets and
Chinese energy policy. What's the one
thing you think people should know about
that particular market or the one thing
that makes China unusual in the grand
scheme of global energy policies?
>> So, one thing I'd like to highlight is
China's changing role in the global
energy system. So, for most of the time
that I've been following China's energy
sector, you know, it's and looking at
China's role in global energy markets,
it's been China as a growing importer of
oil and natural gas, both pipeline gas
and LNG, as an opportunistic
coal importer,
but there's an important change underway
in China, you know, which is that the
country is
transitioning to a lower-carbon future.
You may have seen a lot of news reports
about record record level of
you know, wind and solar capacity
installations in China.
Part of this is certainly about
decarbonization.
It's also about energy supply security.
You know, that I think one thing China
has taken away from the war in Ukraine,
from you know, US activities in
Venezuela, you know, the current war in
Iran, is that you know, it's better just
to be able to sort of rely on energy
sources within your own borders. There's
an energy supply story as well. There's
an energy security story for China.
But, the other thing that's going on
here is that China wants to continue to
be the supplier of the green
technologies that the rest of the world
needs for decarbonization,
energy security, you know, access to
reliable and affordable energy. So,
those three sets of goals. And so, we
are seeing China emerge as this green
tech superpower,
if you will. And so, it's very
interesting to sort of think about this
and China playing this role, you know,
at the same time that the United States
is advancing this agenda of energy
dominance, which of course is focused
on, you know, exporting more US
LNG and oil and sort of using those as a
source of leverage. You know, and I sort
of when I think about my that my
instinctive reaction is you know, maybe
more of course it could be a carrot or a
stick, you know, but I think of it as
being more of a stick, whereas I think
that, you know, China has, you know,
something very different that it can
offer that, you know, might be quite
appealing to a lot of countries in the
world. There's a lot of countries don't
want to spend a lot of their foreign
exchange on energy imports. They don't
want to be vulnerable to supply
disruptions. And so, if China's coming
along and saying that, okay, you have,
you know, great solar energy resources
and uh you can buy solar panels from us
or you can hire, you know, a Chinese EPC
contractor to, you know, to to to
you know, build you, you know, a solar
farm, then, you know, countries don't
have to spend as much energy and foreign
exchange. And just as one example, um
you know, I
did a lot of work a number of years ago,
like circa 2018, 2019, looking at why
China, you know, was was building, you
know, so many coal-fired power plants in
Pakistan when the country had, you know,
sort of tremendous, you know, renewable
energy resource, you know, wind and
solar resources especially, especially
solar. And when I was, you know, so I
ended up doing this deep dive into
Pakistan's energy sector, you know, and
one of the things I discovered is that
they were spending a lot of, you know,
very precious foreign exchange on, you
know, importing fuel oil, you know, and
now, you know, coal, you know, to um you
know, to you know, to to to for to run
these power plants. And you know, that
was an issue. Um and now we are seeing
there've been a lot of reports over the
past year about how you have individual
households and businesses in Pakistan
that have been buying a lot of Chinese
solar panels to put on their roofs so
that they have, um you know, affordable
uh and reliable energy. And so, I just
whenever I, you know, hear about the
Pakistan example, I sort of keep
thinking back to that earlier research
that I did and how, you know, this, you
know, to a certain extent has to be, you
know, helping Pakistan conserve foreign
exchange or conserve foreign exchange
that it previously, uh, you know, would
spend on it would have spent on energy
imports. Um, I don't know the size of
the savings off the top of my head, but
that's just, you know, one example I
wanted to highlight.
>> Yeah, it does seem like, you know, up
for most of recent history and still
today, like fossil fuel dominant is
incredibly important and it's not like
that's not going to change overnight.
And so, yes, you have incredible, uh,
fossil fuel capacity reserves in the US,
Latin America, uh, the Middle East and
so forth. But the longer-term
trend, as you spell it out, seems to be
like at some point
that much of the world just doesn't need
as much of it and their ability to
reduce their energy bill will come from
Chinese technology, whether we're
talking about wind, solar, or batteries
that has been installed, uh,
domestically and potentially reducing
their bill. And so, the payments that
were at one point going to the US or
going to the UAE, etc., switches to
being payments for renewable technology
from China.
>> Yes.
>> Great. I
>> [laughter]
>> I I said I summed up the, uh,
>> I mean, I could also, I mean, the other
sort of thing here is that I mean, I
think that and if we sort of, you know,
looking again at China,
um, you know, oil China's demand for
diesel and gasoline, um, has already
peaked. In the case of diesel, a lot of
it has to do with the property collapse.
You know, with gasoline, it's been the
rapid uptake of EVs. And as a result of
this very rapid, um, uptake of EVs, the
International Energy Agency, uh, you
know, some of China's national oil
companies, you know, have moved forward
their date for when China's, you know,
overall oil demand is going to peak. You
know, and before I was seeing you know,
years dates closer to 2030, now 2027. At
one point Sinopec one of the national
oil companies had even said, you know,
2025.
And so,
as I, you know, just mentioned we have
seen, you know, demand for for road
transport fuel peak, but China will
still need oil for petrochemicals,
which in turn are used to,
you know, in the are used in some of
these green technologies, right? Like,
you know, we need, you know,
petrochemicals feedstocks as inputs for,
you know, EVs, for solar panels, for
lithium ion batteries. So, there is, you
know, there is a link there and we will
see, you know, China still needs to, you
know, import some oil
to
you know, continue to be a leader in
manufacturing these technologies.
>> So, I I know you're not macroeconomist,
obviously, but when you when you look at
what's happening now in Iran and the
situation in the Middle East, what's
your best guess for how this actually
feeds into Chinese inflation and the
broader, I guess, energy energy prices.
Like, how much could we actually see
domestic energy prices in China go up as
a result of curtailed supply and how
much of that curtailed supply can just
be offset from the reserve?
>> Yeah, so
we are seeing higher prices for energy.
I know we've been talking a lot about
oil, but I'd actually like to turn to
LNG to answer this question. So, China
imports
almost 1/3 of its LNG from the Middle
East. Almost all of that comes from
Cutter.
You know, with you know, a little bit
from the UAE and Oman. Oman obviously
lies outside the Strait of Hormuz, but
if you look at the supplies coming, you
know, first and foremost from Cutter and
that little bit from you know, from the
UAE,
those supplies are no longer flowing to
China. You know, and you know, China
doesn't have a massive, you know,
strategic gas reserve
you know, the way it does with oil. And
so, you know, to the extent, you know,
that so the
the longer
you know, the supply of LNG from you
know, from Cutter to China is you know,
is disrupted, you know, the more China
is going to be under pressure to cobble
together a response. And I think in the
very short term,
you know, one of the big things you
know, that they can do is find ways to
use less gas. And here, you know,
sky-high, you know, prices for spot
cargoes,
you know, is going to help China do
that. You know, and there have there has
been reporting in industry press where,
you know, unnamed, you know, traders,
you know, certainly at the big
state-owned companies, you know, have
been saying that, you know, we're not
going to buy anything on the spot market
right now because prices are just too
high.
>> Do they do they frack in China? Have
they got into the fracking revolution
yet? Is that a is that a thing over
there?
>> Yeah, they have. And actually, last
year, 43%
of China's natural gas production came
from unconventional sources.
And this statistic is really of interest
to me because I remember, you know, back
when the US shale revolution
was taking off, you know, people would
often note that on paper, you know,
China's, you know, shale resources were,
you know,
you know, sort of either, you know, were
bigger than or, you know, almost as big
as the United States. Like basically
about, I mean, this is going back like
15, 16 years. Um,
but basically, you know,
there were big
China had big shale resources on paper.
And so, I would often get the question,
you know, are we going to see a shale
revolution in China? And my answer was I
wrote it's going to be more of a shale
evolution, um, you know, because of, you
know, different, uh, factors in the
United States and China. Like in the
United States, for example, um, you
know, a lot of the shale that that
people who were sitting above, you know,
promising shale resources could be
compensated for that. Uh, not so much in
China. You know, in the United States,
you know, the, uh, shale revolution was
really launched by these, you know,
small, nimble companies, you know,
really seeking to maximize profit.
Whereas in China, if you look at all
the, you know, upstream oil and gas
assets, they're concentrated in the
hands of China's net national oil
companies, uh, you know, which are
state-owned, maybe not as nimble, and
certainly have, you know, And so, you
know, so there are a number of different
factors. Those are just, you know, two
that I can mention. I can
>> I'm really interested in this because if
you think about China's, you know,
large infrastructure projects and its
renewable build-out, it feels like they
basically are able to flip a switch and
say like we want to go big on this, and
then they go big on this relatively
quickly and probably faster than it
usually happens in places like the
States. But you're saying for this one
thing, for for fracking, that wasn't the
case, which is very surprising to me.
>> Yeah, it's been a much more gradual
build-up of, you know, unconventional,
uh, gas production in China. And of
course, you know, when I say 43% of gas
production, um, um you know, it's from
unconventional sources, you know, that's
also including things like like tight
gas. It's it's not all shale, although
shale is absolutely part of the story.
Yeah, and so, you know, to your point,
yes, this was sort of a much gradual
this was like a much more gradual build
up in
um unconventional gas production.
>> All right. Erica Downs, fascinating
conversation. I learned a lot in uh that
45 minutes. Really appreciate you coming
on to Odd Lots, and um yeah, thanks for
joining us.
>> Thanks so much for having me.
>> Tracy, that was a really interesting
conversation. I didn't know that about
the um I mean, I guess I'm not surprised
that there were small refineries, but
that they serve this very strategic
purpose of not having those
international, I guess, liabilities,
right? They don't have the same
liability.
>> system that they've built outside of, I
guess, like the the more regulated,
official energy industry. It's and it's
fascinating to me, A,
it's a good exercise in branding, cuz I
just find the teapot name so compelling,
but also, it's like an entire arbitrage
industry, right?
>> Yeah, yeah. No, makes sense, right?
Like, oil is what There's always going
to be someone sanctioned, right? That's
That seems like safe. There's always
especially in
>> Three certainties in life: death, taxes,
and someone, somewhere, is going to have
their oil sanctioned.
>> That's absolutely true. And so, yeah,
but they're going to sell it, and
they're going to sell it at a discount,
and obviously, any buyer of sanctioned
commodities is going to be taking on
some sort of risk that they're going to
get slapped with like a secondary
sanction or penalty, and so forth. So,
it makes sense to have a sort of a, you
know, decentralized cottage industry.
Cottage industry, it's another
cute-sounding thing. It's not really
cute.
>> Um it's all very cute.
>> very cute. Um but another this whole the
yeah, this separate industry that does
not have the same They're not exposed in
the same way.
>> Yeah, and the other thing I was very
interested to hear. Obviously, the
discussion around the strategic
petroleum reserve was very interesting.
This idea that, you know,
there might be foreign policy
considerations behind building up that
strategic supply.
Also, the idea that shale hasn't taken
off as fast in China. Like again, that
really surprises me because we're so
used to hearing that one of the benefits
of a command economy is that you can
more or less, you know,
direct this big stuff, and it doesn't
seem to have happened in the case of
shale. And again, maybe that maybe
that's more of a strategic decision
>> I was going to say, I mean, what I would
surmise, and this is just speculation,
is like, no, like the big priority is
the renewables, right? The big priority
is batteries, solar, wind, and so forth.
And they've And I do think this is like
going to be the big I don't know how
long it'll take place, but the big shift
that's already happening, I guess, under
underway is this like a bunch of other
countries that aren't the US and aren't
China are going to want to reduce their
energy import bill, and they're going to
swap it for an energy technology bill
that they license from China, and that
is a long-term um
>> I think that's a really important point.
>> important trend, and uh events like the
war are in the short term going to raise
China's import bill and others, and in
the long term or the medium term,
encourage more countries to accelerate
that transition. So, that's a pretty big
story.
>> Pros and cons?
>> Yes.
>> Um if there's anyone out there who's
working in Chinese shale or fracking or
has attempted to work in Chinese shale
or fracking, I'd be very interested in
talking to them. So, definitely
>> to watch the uh the Land Man of China.
You know,
>> [laughter]
>> I haven't watched the Land Man America
version, um but I bet that would be
interesting.
>> You got to watch it.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> Okay, this has been another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
You can follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. you can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our guest
Erica Downs, she's at Erica Downs.
Follow our producer Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman dash at a dash bot and Kil
Brooks at Kil Brooks.
>> And for more Odd Lots content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at
>> And you can chat about all these topics
in our Discord 24/7. That's
discord.gg/odd
lots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music]